1.1 Pengodean Langsung

# Pengodean Langsung

Salah satu aspek yang paling menarik dari Sonic Pi adalah memungkinkan Anda untuk menulis dan *memodifikasi kode secara langsung* untuk membuat musik, seperti halnya Anda bermain gitar secara langsung. Artinya, dengan sedikit latihan, Anda bisa membawa Sonic Pi ke atas panggung dan manggung dengannya.

## Bebaskan pikiranmu

Sebelum kita masuk ke detail tentang cara kerja Sonic Pi dalam sisa tutorial ini, saya ingin memberi Anda pengalaman tentang bagaimana rasanya membuat kode langsung. Jangan khawatir jika Anda tidak mengerti banyak (atau semua) hal ini. Cobalah untuk tetap duduk di kursi Anda dan nikmati...

## Sebuah live loop

Mari kita mulai, salin kode berikut ini ke dalam buffer kosong:

```
live_loop :flibble do
  sample :bd_haus, rate: 1
  sleep 0.5
end
```

Now, press the `Run` button and you'll hear a nice fast bass drum beating away. If at any time you wish to stop the sound just hit the `Stop` button. Although don't hit it just yet... Instead, follow these steps:

1. Make sure the bass drum sound is still running
2. Change the `sleep` value from `0.5` to something higher like `1`.
3. Press the `Run` button again
4. Notice how the drum speed has changed.
5. Finally, *remember this moment*, this is the first time you've live coded with Sonic Pi and it's unlikely to be your last...

Ok, that was simple enough. Let's add something else into the mix. Above `sample :bd_haus` add the line `sample :ambi_choir, rate: 0.3`. Your code should look like this:

```
live_loop :flibble do
  sample :ambi_choir, rate: 0.3
  sample :bd_haus, rate: 1
  sleep 1
end
```

Now, play around. Change the rates - what happens when you use high values, or small values or negative values? See what happens when you change the `rate:` value for the `:ambi_choir` sample just slightly (say to `0.29`). What happens if you choose a really small `sleep` value? See if you can make it go so fast your computer will stop with an error because it can't keep up (if that happens, just choose a bigger `sleep` time and hit `Run` again).

Try commenting one of the `sample` lines out by adding a `#` to the beginning:

```
live_loop :flibble do
  sample :ambi_choir, rate: 0.3
#  sample :bd_haus, rate: 1
  sleep 1
end
```

Notice how it tells the computer to ignore it, so we don't hear it. This is called a comment. In Sonic Pi we can use comments to remove and add things into the mix.

Finally, let me leave you something fun to play with. Take the code below, and copy it into a spare buffer. Now, don't try to understand it too much other than see that there are two loops - so two things going round at the same time. Now, do what you do best - experiment and play around. Here are some suggestions:

* Try changing the blue `rate:` values to hear the sample sound change.
* Try changing the `sleep` times and hear that both loops can spin round at different rates.
* Try uncommenting the sample line (remove the `#`) and enjoy the sound of the guitar played backwards.
* Try changing any of the blue `mix:` values to numbers between `0` (not in the mix) and `1` (fully in the mix).

Remember to press `Run` and you'll hear the change next time the loop goes round. If you end up in a pickle, don't worry - hit `Stop`, delete the code in the buffer and paste a fresh copy in and you're ready to jam again. Making mistakes is how you'll learn the quickest...


```
live_loop :guit do
  with_fx :echo, mix: 0.3, phase: 0.25 do
    sample :guit_em9, rate: 0.5
  end
#  sample :guit_em9, rate: -0.5
  sleep 8
end
live_loop :boom do
  with_fx :reverb, room: 1 do
    sample :bd_boom, amp: 10, rate: 1
  end
  sleep 8
end
```

Now, keep playing and experimenting until your curiosity about how this all actually works kicks in and you start wondering what else you can do with this. You're now ready to read the rest of the tutorial.

So what are you waiting for...
