1.3 Çalarak öğrenme

# Çalarak öğrenme

Sonic Pi, oynama ve deney yoluyla hem bilgisayar hem de müzik hakkında bilgi edinmenizi teşvik eder. En önemli şey, eğleniyor olmanız ve daha farkına bile varmadan, yanlışlıkla kodlamayı, müzik hatta beste yapmayı öğrenmiş olacaksınız.

## Hata yok

Whilst we're on this subject, let me just give you one piece of advice I've learned over my years of live coding with music - *there are no mistakes, only opportunities*. This is something I've often heard in relation to jazz but it works equally well with live coding. No matter how experienced you are - from a complete beginner to a seasoned live coder, you'll run some code that has a completely unexpected outcome. It might sound insanely cool - in which case run with it. However, it might sound totally jarring and out of place. It doesn't matter that it happened - what matters is what you do next with it. Take the sound, manipulate it and morph it into something awesome. The crowd will go *wild*.

## Örneği başlat

When you're learning, it's tempting to want to do amazing things *now*. However, just hold that thought and see it as a distant goal to reach *later*. For now, instead think of the *simplest* thing you could write which would be fun and rewarding that's a small step towards the amazing thing you have in your head. Once you have an idea about that simple step, then try and build it, play with it and then see what new ideas it gives you. Before long you'll be too busy having fun and making real progress.

Projeni diğer kişilerle paylaşmayı unutma
