11.2 Saída MIDI

# Saída MIDI

Além de receber eventos MIDI nõs podemos também enviar eventos MIDI para disparar e controlar hardware de sintetizadores externos, teclados e outros aparelho. O Sonic Pi fornece um conjunto completo de funções para enviar várias mensagens MIDI como:

1. Ligar nota - `midi_note_on`
2. Desligar nota - `midi_note_off`
3. Mudança de controle - `midi_cc`
4. Pitch bend  - `midi_pitch_bend`
5. Tiques do relógio - `midi_clock_tick`

Também existem muitas outras mensagens MIDI suportadas - verifique a documentação da API para todas as outras funções que começam com `midi_`.

## Conectando um aparelho MIDI

In order to send a MIDI message to an external device, we must first have connected it. Check out the subsection 'Connecting a MIDI Controller' in section 11.1 for further details. Note that if you're using USB, connecting to a device which you're sending to (rather than receiving from) is the same procedure. However, if you're using the classic DIN connectors, make sure you connect to the MIDI out port of your computer. You should see your MIDI device listed in the preferences pane.

## Enviando eventos MIDI

The many `midi_*` fns work just like `play`, `sample` and `synth` in that they send a message at the current (logical) time. For example, to spread out calls to the `midi_*` fns you need to use `sleep` just like you did with `play`. Let's take a look:

```
midi_note_on :e3, 50
```

This will send a MIDI note on event to the connected MIDI device with velocity 50. (Note that Sonic Pi will automatically convert notes in the form `:e3` to their corresponding MIDI number such as 52 in this case.)

If your connected MIDI device is a synthesiser, you should be able to hear it playing a note. To disable it use `midi_note_off`:

```
midi_note_off :e3
```

## Selecionando um aparelho MIDI

By default, Sonic Pi will send each MIDI message to all connected devices on all MIDI channels. This is to make it easy to work with a single connected device without having to configure anything. However, sometimes a MIDI device will treat MIDI channels in a special way (perhaps each note has a separate channel) and also you may wish to connect more than one MIDI device at the same time. In more complicated setups, you may wish to be more selective about which MIDI device receives which message(s) and on which channel.

We can specify which device to send to using the `port:` opt, using the device name as displayed in the preferences:

```
midi_note_on :e3, port: "moog_minitaur"
```

We can also specify which channel to send to using the `channel:` opt (using a value in the range 1-16):

```
midi_note_on :e3, channel: 3
```

Of course we can also specify both at the same time to send to a specific device on a specific channel:

```
midi_note_on :e3, port: "moog_minitaur", channel: 5
```

## MIDI Studio

Finally, a really fun thing to do is to connect the audio output of your MIDI synthesiser to one of the audio inputs of your soundcard. You can then control your synth with code using the `midi_*` fns and also manipulate the audio using `live_audio` and FX:

```
reverb,
```

(The fn `midi` is available as a handy shortcut to sending both note on and note off events with a single command. Check out its documentation for further information).
