12.1 Receiving OSC

# Receiving OSC

Por defecto, cuando Sonic Pi se lanza, escucha el puerto 4560 para los mensajes OSC entrantes de los programas en el mismo ordenador. Esto significa que sin ninguna configuración, puede enviar a Sonic Pi un mensaje OSC y se mostrará en el registro de cue al igual que los mensajes MIDI entrantes. Esto también significa que cualquier mensaje OSC entrante también se añade automáticamente al Time State, lo que significa que también puede utilizar `get` y `sync` para trabajar con los datos entrantes - al igual que con MIDI y la sincronización de `live_loops` - ver las secciones 5.7 y 10.2 para recapitular cómo funciona.

## A Basic OSC Listener

Let's build a basic OSC listener:

```
live_loop :foo do
  use_real_time
  a, b, c = sync "/osc*/trigger/prophet"
  synth :prophet, note: a, cutoff: b, sustain: c
end
```

In this example we described an OSC path `"/osc*/trigger/prophet"` which we're syncing on. This can be any valid OSC path (all letters and numbers are supported and the `/` is used like in a URL to break up the path to multiple words). The `/osc` prefix is added by Sonic Pi to all incoming OSC messages, so we need to send an OSC message with the path `/trigger/prophet` for our `sync` to stop blocking and the prophet synth to be triggered.


## Sending OSC to Sonic Pi

We can send OSC to Sonic Pi from any programming language that has an OSC library. For example, if we're sending OSC from Python we might do something like this:

```
from pythonosc import osc_message_builder
from pythonosc import udp_client
sender = udp_client.SimpleUDPClient('127.0.0.1', 4560)
sender.send_message('/trigger/prophet', [70, 100, 8])
```

Or, if we're sending OSC from Clojure we might do something like this from the REPL:

```
(use 'overtone.core)
(def c (osc-client "127.0.0.1" 4560))
(osc-send c "/trigger/prophet" 70 100 8)
```

## Receiving from External Machines

For security reasons, by default Sonic Pi does not let remote machines send it OSC messages. However, you can enable support for remote machines in Preferences->IO->Networked OSC->Allow OSC from other computers. Once you've enabled this, you can receive OSC messages from any computer on your network. Typically the sending machine will need to know your IP address (a unique identifier for your computer on your network - kind of like a phone number or an email address). You can discover the IP address of your computer by looking at the IO section of the preferences pane. (If your machine happens to have more than one IP address, hovering the mouse over the listed address will pop up with a list of all known addresses).

Note, some programs such as TouchOSC for iPhone and Android support sending OSC as a standard feature. So, once you're listening to remote machines and know your IP address you can instantly start sending messages from apps like TouchOSC which enable you to build your own custom touch controls with sliders, buttons, dials etc. This can provide you with an enormous range of input options.
